From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bavaro. This is the Daily.
By Monday evening, the death toll from
the flooding in central Texas had
surpassed 100. 27 of them from a single
place, Camp Mystic, a century old all
girls Christian summer camp.
Today, the story of what that camp meant
to the generations of girls who attended
it. I spoke with one of them, Aaron
Pyan.
It's Tuesday, July 8th.
Well, Aaron, thank you for making time
for us. We really appreciate it.
You're welcome. I uh it's been a hard 3
days for a lot of us in the Mystic
community.
My first year at Mystic was 1975
when I was 10
and my mom sent me for 5 weeks.
And how many years did you end up at
Camp Mystic?
Okay. So, bubble in, tumble in, look in,
look out.
Um,
Idiots.
Idiots. That's the name of a cabin.
Idiots Delight was the name of it.
I was there six summers.
Mhm.
I was not there as much as a lot of
other people, but it was just a very
special place for me the years that I've
spent there.
Yeah. Those are very formative years.
Yes.
[Music]
Well, Erin, that's what we want to talk
to you about. what Camp Mystic means to
people, what it meant to campers like
you, and why it occupied such a big
place in the lives of so many people.
And I wonder if you could take us back
to the very beginning of Camp Mystic for
you. Talk about your your first
impressions of this place.
Well, let me tell you about how I chose
Camp Mystic.
My older brother went to Camp Stewart,
which is on the other fork of the river.
And when we were down there picking him
up, we went across a bridge that crosses
the waterfront of Camp Mystic. And all
these girls were out on the riverfront
splashing and playing and it was just so
beautiful. And I was 6 years old and I
said to mom, I want to go to that camp.
And that's how I ended up at Camp
Mystic. I was not one of those kids who
was on a generational list.
Just explain that generational list.
It was such a special place that
generations of women wanted to send
their daughters or granddaughters
and there was only a certain amount of
space.
So if you wanted your daughter or
granddaughter to go, you had to get on
the list early. And some people thought
it was birth.
Get on the list at birth.
Yes. And my mom was a single parent of
four children. We were not like an elite
family.
Mhm.
And somehow my mom I I don't know. I got
off the list and went.
Well, paint a picture of what this place
is like for the younger version of you
when you arrive.
Clearly, you had an idea of it from
seeing it from the waterfront with your
brother, but when you actually get
there,
so let it be known that I packed my
trunk in December. I was so excited.
December for a summer that was many,
many, many, many months away.
I was second term. I wasn't even first
term. I went in early July.
And when that day finally comes, you get
on that bus with a lot of older girl
campers that have gone for years. And
these are girls who are in high school.
And you're like, and you're heading down
toward the Hill Country.
And the best part is you're looking for
the mystic sign. There is a lighted sign
that overlooks the river. And so as soon
as you start to see the mystic sign and
turn that corner, everyone just starts
screaming because they are so excited to
go through those gates. And people get
off of that bus and they go running for
their friends from the summer before.
I just so struck by the excitement and
the joy that you are conveying in this
moment. I mean, you are very far removed
from this experience, but you're you're
right back there.
Well, listen, I am not lying. And you
could have my two daughters on this call
who know that when I die, my ashes are
to be spread at Camp Mystic. Wow.
It runs that deep for people who went to
that camp. It was a very, very safe
space, you know. It just was a clean
slate. No one knew what you were like at
school every day. No one knew that I was
the geeky kid. I just was a camp mystic
girl. I didn't even have a present
father. I didn't know what anybody
else's father did or how much money or
the size of the house they lived in. It
was a space where people could come and
it was a level playing field.
You're describing an experience of being
anonymous in the best possible way
because from what you're saying, you
didn't have an idyllic childhood.
I felt different from
my mom was a busy mom. She was one of
the only divorced parents when I went
off to camp. So, I did not have an
idyllic childhood. I had a privileged
childhood, but you know, just because
you're privileged doesn't mean that
things are always going well at home.
And I think a lot of kids were grappling
with themselves and they came to Mystic
and it was just a place to be a child.
What did it mean to be at a camp with
only other girls?
Well, I didn't have an older sister.
I had an older brother and he was great,
but I looked up to girls. I don't think
I understood that at the time. And it
was also
a place where you could just be silly.
And I don't know that I would have been
silly in front of boys at that age.
There were all kinds of shenanigans
always going on in Camp Mystic between
these girls. I mean, there were pranks.
What's your favorite shenanigan? I
probably shouldn't mention this one, but
you would be standing in line waiting to
get into the dining hall and someone
would just come up and yank your pants
down to your ankles. I mean, it was
those kinds of crazy funny. We rolled
around in the mud and we threw mud at
each other and you know, just
you were free to be exactly who you
wanted to be in that moment.
Yep.
At a time, I guess we should say when
you're just figuring out who you are.
Exactly. And it was so easy because it
was such a beautiful place.
Well, just describe this beautiful
place, the the layout, the geography.
Once you're there, you're off that bus.
What do you see? And what do you feel?
The road into Mystic is something I
still dream about on a regular basis.
You you roll through the gate and on
your left is a huge swath, which is
called the golf course, but I think it's
used for a lot of different things. But
it's a very open field with the
background of the hills. It is is
spectacular view. And that's where the
mystic sign at night is lit up and
shines over the river. And then the
waterfront, which was what initially
drew me.
We spent a lot of time having campfires
down by the water. And the smell. Oh,
you know
what is the smell? The smell is the
trees and the cedar and the the river.
I wonder if you can spend a little more
time on that river. Clearly, it's what
drew you into this place and what is it
like and and what role does it play in
the in the life of the camp?
The river is like a character because if
you had an 8:00 swim class, you were
dreading going in that river cuz it was
faking cold. But it was also a place of
refreshment.
They had these huge floats on the river
that you could swim out to and jump off
of. There was a diving board. There was
snorkeling. There was canoeing.
And we spent a lot of time having
campfires down by the water.
There was a song called um Peace I ask
of the O River and we we sang it at
bonfires.
And then there was the um there's a camp
on the Guadaloopy River.
It is the camp of my dreams
where the whiper wills call softly and
the bright moon beams.
There's a camp on the Guadaloopy River
where hearts are loyal
and true.
Camp Mystic, I will pledge my true and
faithful love to you.
I sang that to my children in the middle
of the night when they were babies.
What does it feel like to sing that song
right now?
It's just it's heartbreaking. It really
is.
Honestly, you know, I live with a man
who when he can't sleep, he plays a golf
course in his mind. I go straight to the
river at Camp Mystic. Hm.
And it calms me because at night the way
that the bonfires, the campfires on the
river happened where everybody lined up
by cabin and oftent times we were
holding candles and you sang all the way
to the river and you brought a towel and
you sat in the cool wet grass and the
river was just like glass some nights.
Mhm. Calm. calm.
So in the restless version of your
night, when you see this river, you see
the calm, idyllic version.
Yeah. I just go to Camp Mystic in my
mind, you know? I just picture being
there and how I felt.
Erin, were you or anyone else in the
camp ever instructed
to think about this river, which is
clearly the source of so much joy and
activity.
Were you ever told to see it as
something that could be dangerous?
Well, not from a flooding standpoint,
but nobody ever went near the water
without a counselor near them.
Mhm.
Now, I do Okay, here's one thing I do
remember.
The thing we were I was most afraid of
was someone crossing the river in the
middle of the night because there were
so many horror movies out, you know,
an Owen outsider somehow getting across
the river to the campers.
The camp was very protective of campers,
you know, their safety was numero uno
and so they had a night watchman and he
sat in a waterfront chair with a shotgun
every night.
Wow.
I felt protected. You know, there was a
lot of protocol around safety there,
but not around flooding.
No,
no,
not prior to 78.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
[Laughter]
Aaron, when did you come to understand
that flooding was a potential danger at
this camp?
1978.
I was 13 and I don't really even
remember it raining all that hard when
we went to bed.
I was on the top bunk and in the middle
of the night, I mean, you could start to
hear the rain really coming down. It
woke me up and I
got up and I looked out and there was
this huge cypress tree right next to the
creek. At the top of this cypress tree,
there was a light that lit the way up
the hill.
Mhm.
And the water was just below the light.
Wow.
And I was terrified.
And I can't remember whether my
counselor was already up and could see
what was going on, but I walked over to
her and I said, "We got to get out of
here."
You could tell that that this was
flooding.
Yes. So, we were all told that we were
going to be moved up to a cabin called
Angel's Attic.
So, you were pretty much evacuated from
your cabin.
Yeah. We didn't have food for a couple
of days. H
And what I do remember was cars going
down the river, deer,
animals, all kinds of big things that
you're just like, "Oh my god,
wow."
And the the golf course looked like the
Pacific Ocean. I I just couldn't believe
I was looking out on all this water that
was just raging.
And then what really
resonated with me was how devoted the
staff was to keeping everybody safe.
The water was starting to recede a
little bit, but it was still raging. And
I remember watching with horror as a
counselor, they were trying to get food
over to us, like peanut butter
sandwiches or something from the dining
hall. and
they got on a horse and I remember
watching them try to get across and I
was like, "Please God, please, please
don't let anything happen to these
people." Like, everyone was just
waiting, you know, just couldn't believe
they were trying to get to us cuz it was
still really dangerous.
But understand that the flood of 78 was
nothing.
It just doesn't that pales in comparison
to what just happened.
Well, knowing what you know about
flooding at this camp, when did you
first hear that there had been another
much much worse flood?
Well, I'm constantly on the Camp Mystic
alumni reunion site on social media, so
I think I must have started to see
things
on that first. And people were
just in a frenzy, just so grieved.
Everybody's just heartbroken.
But honestly, until yesterday, I was
completely numb. Yesterday, I just fell
apart. Yesterday was the day that I just
broke when I started seeing some of the
pictures of these campers.
One is two little girls that were best
friends, Llaya Bonner and her little
friend Eloise Peek with their arms
around each other just broke me.
Just broke me.
Um, and then
the footage of the girls that were being
evacuated.
I know. I'm trying so hard not to cry.
Can you tell me about that footage? I
haven't seen it.
They're seeing the destruction.
And they're singing through it.
[Music]
That's what we did at Mystic.
You know, we just sang.
I want to pass it on.
So really in the middle of the worst
thing that will likely ever happen to
these girls,
they are invoking the songs that you
learned when you first got there and
that seems so essential to the culture
of this place. They're they're taking
care of each other.
Yes.
That's part of being what they call a
mystic girl.
We look out for each other
and we trust God. You know, whoever that
is for you, you know,
[Music]
reckless love of God.
Can I ask you what may feel like a very
delicate question about these floods?
And perhaps it strikes you as too early
to ask this, but your own experience
makes me want to ask you it.
This wonderful place floods with some
frequency, right? I mean, it happened to
you in 78, but in my reading and in the
reporting from our colleagues at the
times, it happened again with deadly
consequences in, I think, 1987
in this region, and even more deadly
consequences this past weekend, July
4th.
How do you think about why, whether it's
parents or local officials,
the folks who run the camp, why people
keep tolerating the risk level of these
floods and perhaps not doing a ton to
mitigate them.
Um,
like in 1978,
that flood rose so fast in the middle of
the night that you couldn't see. Nobody
could see or predict it was going to
rise that fast. So,
what what would have worked a siren
system in that area? To my to my
knowledge, I don't know. I mean, it is
so remote down there that trying to put
a siren system in um is not
something I I'm sure they looked at it.
They they did. In fact, the local
officials talked about it. But I'm
hearing you say you're not convinced
that even if the best system was in
place, it would necessarily prevent
I don't know. I think it's a difficult
it's a huge it's a huge lift in that
area because you can barely get cell
service and these camps are so spread
out you know but honestly as someone who
lived through a flood down there that
came on the camp so fast that nobody
could have stopped it even a siren
system I mean
I I don't know
well what do you think happens to camp
mystic now damn image is really
extraordinary.
And there's the reality that folks may
not want to send their children back to
a place that has now flooded so
catastrophically and could in theory
flood catastrophically again.
Well, of course, I would love to see
camp miss come back, but I don't think
um yeah, I don't know. M
maybe this was a wakeup call for the
community that
the money needs to be invested in
something. I don't know. I don't know
what that answer is. All I can say is
it's it was a very important place to me
and and many other young girls and women
still is.
I wonder if after everything that's just
happened when you are sitting in bed
restless at night if you think you will
still think back to the image of the
river this calm river which is what you
said you think about.
You know what I will never not go to
that river.
[Music]
Has it become sort of a character in my
mind that can be angry sometimes? Yes.
But I choose to hold on to the beautiful
moments there.
Would you could hear the, you know, the
locusts and the crickets and the crackle
of the, you know, the bonfire.
Mhm. We understand
how we feel
when it's
and the voices of all these girls
singing softly together, you know,
I hang on to those things and that's
what makes it special. change.
Thank you.
Truly, we appreciate it.
You're welcome. It's a privilege to uh
to share
about this place.
We love you, M.
We love you, Miss.
[Music]
On Monday night, hundreds of Camp Mystic
alumni and supporters gathered at a park
in Dallas for a vigil to mourn those who
had died at the camp.
Meanwhile, the Lieutenant Governor of
Texas, Dan Patrick, expressed dismay
that a system of floodwing sirens were
not in place to protect places like Camp
Mystic and said that the state's
government would seek to have such a
system installed by next summer.
Had we had sirens along this area up and
down, that would have blown very loudly,
it's it's possible that that would have
saved some of these lives. And so if the
city can
[Music]
we'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday, President Trump revived his
threat of tariffs, ranging from 25% to
40%.
countries that have yet to reach trade
deals with the US.
Among the countries threatened were
Japan, South Korea, and South Africa.
Trump paused his original tariffs for 90
days until July 9th and has extended
that deadline until August 1st. The new
threats appear designed to encourage
deals before then, but so far the US has
reached only two preliminary trade deals
with Britain and Vietnam.
Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson, Claire Tennis, and Olivia Nad.
It was edited by Liz O. Balen and
Michael Benois. Fact Check by Caitlyn
Love contains original music by Dan
Powell, Marian Lozano, and Diane Wong,
and was engineered by Chris Wood. Our
theme music is by Jim Brundberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly. Special thanks to
Edgar Sandival.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Boro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]